hey what's going on everybody it's your
bro hope you're doing well and in this
video I'm going to show you how we can
start writing SQL using the MySQL
workbench so sit back relax and enjoy
the show
all right let's get started everybody
SQL it's an acronym meaning structured
query language SQL is used to create
retrieve update and delete data from a
database suppose we own a business like
the Krusty Krab from SpongeBob if we had
to manually track all of the
transactions by pen and paper well that
would be a lot of extra work if we had a
database we could keep track of these
records electronically and save
ourselves a lot of trouble right there's
two types of databases I'll discuss
relational and non-relational a table in
a relational database it resembles an
Excel spreadsheet there's rows and
columns tables within a relational
database can form well relationships
with one another and that is done by
this concept of keys which I'll explain
in a further topic then there's
non-relational databases that's where
our data is organized in any format but
a table this could include Json files
key value pairs graph data structures
entities of that nature to utilize data
in a relational database we would use
SQL then with a non-relational database
we would use a different language named
nosql meaning not only SQL but since
this is an SQL series we will be working
with SQL and relational databases not
non-relational databases to write SQL
statements we would need the help of a
special piece of software known as a
database management system people
shorten this to Simply
dbms it's a workspace for us to write
SQL statements and generally just work
with our database it'll make our lives
easier there are different dbms systems
you can use one of which is MySQL
Microsoft SQL Server Oracle and postgres
SQL but there's still many more out
there each of these database Management
Systems all use SQL but there's subtle
nuances between these syntax of each
database management system if you're
familiar with one database management
system transitioning to another will
take little to no effort at all in this
series we will be working with the mySQL
database management system and I'll show
you how to download that for both
Windows and Mac OS
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
explain how we can download MySQL using
the Windows operating system first of
all head to this website mysql.com then
go to the downloads tab
scroll down look for MySQL Community
downloads we'll click on that
click on MySQL installer for Windows
make sure that we have our Windows
operating system selected
then download the first installer
no thanks just start my download
we will open this download once it's
complete
there are various setup types depending
on what packages you need for this
series all we need is the server and the
workbench we'll select the custom radio
button
click next
we will need the most recent MySQL
server
add that to products to be installed
open applications go to mySQL workbench
we will add the most recent workbench
we can close out of that there is a
shell if you're interested in using that
but I will be sticking with the
workbench in this series once we have
our server and our workbench I will
click next
then execute
looks like there's an error downloading
the workbench I'm going to try again
and it worked this time for some reason
let's click next
execute
give it some time once the installation
status for the server and the workbench
is complete we can click on next
next
I'll keep these default configurations
use strong password encryption for
authentication let's click next
here we're going to set the root
password to access the server think of
some password you would like I'm just
going to set mine to be password I'll
keep it simple
yeah of course the password strength is
weak you can add user accounts but
that'll be outside the scope of this
series
click next
you can start the MySQL server at system
startup if you would like I'll keep that
on
click next
then execute
then finish
then next
yeah we might as well start the MySQL
workbench after setup
if this window doesn't pop up you can
easily just search for it just look for
MySQL workbench
now we should have a local instance
we can click on this to access our
server let's pretend that this wasn't
here I'm going to right click delete
connection
if you need to set up a connection hit
this plus button
we'll need a connection name I'll name
this Local Host connection method should
be standard TCP IP
the host name is
127.0.0.1 at Port 3306
then press ok
so now that we have our connection set
up we can click on it type in the
password you set for the server mine was
simply password
you could save the password if you want
I might as well
then okay
and here we are within the MySQL
workbench
all right everybody in this topic I'm
going to explain how we can download
MySQL using the Mac operating system
first head to this URL mysql.com
we will go to the downloads tab
scroll down look for MySQL Community
downloads
we'll need both the server and the
workbench but let's start with the
server click on this file
Mac OS 12 DMG archive click the download
button
click on this link no thanks just start
my download
when this DMG archive is finished
downloading we can double click on it
just give it a second
double click on the DMG archive
allow
click continue
you can read the license agreement I'm
going to pretend I did hit continue
install
type in your computer's password if this
prompt comes up
use strong password encryption hit next
then we'll need a password for our
server type in whatever password you
would like to keep it simple for this
lesson I'm just going to set my password
to be well password
by checking this box MySQL server will
start once the installation is complete
you might as well keep this checked but
for demonstration purposes I'm going to
show you how to start the server
manually
then close
I'll go ahead and move the installer to
the trash bin
we have the server downloaded next we
need to download the workbench
again head to mysql.com
go to downloads
scroll down to mySQL Community downloads
click on MySQL workbench
then hit the blue download button
no thanks just start my download
then we can double click on this DMG
archive when it's finished downloading
so double click
drag and drop the workbench icon into
your applications folder
before we access the workbench let's be
sure that the MySQL server is running
click on the top left Apple logo
go to system preferences at the bottom
left corner look for MySQL
click on it
then start MySQL server if it's not
started already and you can check this
checkbox so that your computer starts up
with it running
all right you may need to type in your
password
the server is now running
to run the workbench we can go to finder
then applications
look for the MySQL workbench icon
double click on it
and here we are within the MySQL
workbench
to access the server you can click on
this local instance connection then type
in the password that you originally set
for the server
but if you're missing this connection
you can hit the plus button
then create a new connection name I'll
name this Local Host
use standard tcpip for the connection
method
hostname should be
127.0.0.1 and Port 3306 then press ok
but I already have my connection set up
click on your connection type in the
password you set for the server
then press OK and here we are within
MySQL workbench
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
show you how we can create alter and
drop a database what is a database
exactly think of it as a folder it acts
as a container tables on the other hand
would be the files found within the
folder in this topic I'm going to show
you how we can create the database
itself but we won't be working with any
tables until the next topic we'll need
to begin by heading to our query window
which is this large window right here
we're going to write a statement to
create a database we will type create
there is no case sensitivity in MySQL
these keywords such as create they can
be all uppercase
just the first letter could be capital
or you could do all lowercase
with the keywords I like to make them
all uppercase but that's just me create
database
and then we'll need a unique database
name what about my DB then it's
important with all SQL statements to end
each statement with a semicolon it's
like the period at the end of a sentence
that's how we know that the statement is
complete so you'll need these three
words create database then a database
name we just named our database mydb hit
this lightning bolt button to execute
this statement
and in my output window unfortunately I
can't increase the font size but I can
zoom in this action was successful
we have created database mydb if you
head to your schemas tab then hit the
refresh button you should see a database
in here named mydb
there's also a database for sys sys is
the internal database that MySQL uses
we'll want to be sure that we're using
the database that we just created to use
a database we can either right click on
the database
then click on set as default schema or
you could use a statement
use
then the name of the database my DB
semicolon
execute the statement
we are now using my database to drop a
database type drop
database
then the name of the database
and our database is gone unfortunately
we do need a database for this series so
let's go ahead and recreate our database
create database mydb
refresh
then just to be sure we're using this
database we can either use that keyword
use
or you can right click on the database
and set as default schema
all right so we can create use and drop
a database how about alter there's two
features for beginners I'll mention
setting a database to read only the
other is enabling encryption let's set
our database to be read only type alter
database
the name of the database
read
only equals one this statement would
make our database read only
if a database is in read-only mode we
can't make any modifications to it but
we can still access the data Within
let's attempt to drop our database
drop
database my DB
then we have a red X right here that
means we could not complete this action
drop database mydb
schema my DB is in read-only mode to
disable read-only mode you would set
read only equal to zero
now we would be able to drop this
database alright everybody that is how
to create use drop and alter a database
think of a database as just a folder a
folder can hold files the files will be
the tables that we'll create which will
store within the database and in the
next topic I'll show you how we can
create some tables
hey welcome back everybody in this video
I'm going to show you how we can make
some tables in MySQL a table in a
relational database they consist of rows
and columns kind of like an Excel
spreadsheet in this topic we're going to
create the table and the columns but
we'll be populating the rows in the next
video to create a table you'll type
create
table than the name of the table I'll
create a table named employees
then add a set of parentheses semicolon
at the end within the set of parentheses
we will list the columns
for employees let's have an employee ID
comma
each column is separated with a comma
then a first name
last name
how about hourly pay that'd be good
higher date which date were they hired
there's one thing that's missing after
each column we need to set the data type
of what we're storing within each column
exactly is the data going to be whole
integers decimals text a timestamp those
are data types an employee ID that could
be a whole integer the data type will be
int add int after the column name
a first name that's a series of
characters the data type for some text
would be VAR Char then within
parentheses the maximum amount of
characters I think 50 characters is
enough for a first name
last name
varchar
50 is good
hourly pay maybe our hourly pay is in
dollars and cents we'll need a decimal
portion there is a data type
that is decimal add a set of parentheses
we'll add the maximum amount of digits
for our decimal
I think 5 should be good
then a Precision two for two decimal
places
the reason that I set the maximum digits
of my hourly pay to be five is that I
don't anticipate anybody's hourly pay
being over
999.99 per hour that's pretty absurd I
think five is enough then we have higher
date
there is a data type which is date if
you need to work with dates otherwise
there's date time if you need to include
the time just the date is fine let's
execute the script
we have created our table employees if I
were to refresh my schemas window
underneath tables we have our employees
table
now I'll show you how we can select a
if you need to select your table you can
type select
asterisk from the name of the table
employees
let's take a look
here's our table so far there's no rows
but there are columns we have employee
ID first name last name hourly pay and
hire date if you need to rename a table
you could type
rename
table the original name
employees
two whatever the new name is
perhaps workers let's try that
rename table employees to workers was
successful if I refresh my schemas
window
the table employees is now known as
workers but I think that's stupid let's
go back and change it
rename table workers to employees
to drop a table I discussed this earlier
you would type drop table the name of
the table I don't want to drop this so
I'm not going to execute the statement
but that's how you would drop a table
drop table the name of the table
if you need to alter a table
there is the alter keyword
let's add a phone number
alter
table
employees
I'm going to write this next part of the
statement on a new line
what do we want to add uh what about a
phone number
add
phone
number
then we'll need to list the data type of
this column
varchar is good
Max size of 15 characters
then we will end this statement
execute the script all right we have
altered our table
let's take a look at our table select
asterisk asterisk means all I don't know
if I explained that select all from
employees
we have employee ID first name last name
hourly pay higher date
then our column phone number
let's rename phone number and change it
to something else
we will again use the altar keyword
alter table
employees
rename
column
phone number
to let's say email
okay then let's take a look again select
all from employees
yeah employee ID first name last name
hourly pay higher date then email
however the data type has not changed
for email
I'm going to refresh my schemas then
underneath information underneath
employees our email column has a max
size of 15 characters let's change that
alter
table
employees
modify
column
email then the new data type varchar
maybe a hundred characters for an email
let's execute this statement
refresh our schemas yeah now our email
column has a size of 100 characters
maybe we need to change the position of
our email column if you need to move
columns around this is how you can do so
let's move our email column so it's
after our last name column
to do that we would type alter table the
name of the table
modify the name of the column to be
moved
email in this case
then the data type
this email column has a data type of
varchar100
then after then the name of the column
we would like our email column to follow
I need my email column to come after my
last name column I will type after
last name
then afterwards I might as well just
display everything select all from
employees you can write more than one
SQL statement
here we are employee ID first name last
name email hourly pay higher date
if you're modifying a column and need it
to be first
you could just say
first
email employee ID first name last name
hourly pay higher date you can use the
after keyword then a column or first if
you need the column to be first
now to drop a column you would type
alter table employees
drop
column
the name of the column to be dropped
email
our email column is no longer there all
right everybody that's how we can create
a table and work with the columns in the
next video we're either going to talk
about data types or learn about
inserting rows into our tables I haven't
decided yet but we'll probably cover one
of those two
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
show you how we can insert rows into a
table we have a table named employees I
will select everything from my table
employees
here are the columns we have an employee
ID first name last name hourly pay and
higher date to insert a row into a table
we would type insert into the name of
the table
followed by values parentheses semicolon
between this set of parentheses we will
add all of the data for a row we will
follow this order beginning with
employee ID first name last name so on
and so forth but we do have to pay
attention to the data types too each
piece of data will be separated with a
comma let's begin with an employee ID
the first employee will be Mr Krabs he's
the first employee I'll give him an
employee ID of one then we'll need a
first name I'll put that within quotes
because the data type of our first name
is varchar basically speaking that's
text
Mr crab's first name is Eugene according
to SpongeBob lore
then we have a last name
last name crabs
hourly pay this is a decimal
Mr Krabs hourly pay will be
25.50 I'm just making up numbers here
higher date here's the format for a date
with anesthetic quotes we will list the
year followed by the month then the day
I'll set Mr Krabs hired date to be
January 2nd 2023
now we can execute these statements
yeah here we go here's the first row
employee ID one
first name Eugene last name crabs hourly
pay 2550 higher date January 2nd 2023 it
can be somewhat tedious to manually
insert each row one statement at a time
let's insert multiple rows at once to do
that after my set of parentheses
I will add another set of parentheses
each separated with a comma depending on
how many rows I would like to enter so I
have four employees I would like to
enter
I will add four sets of parentheses each
separated with the combo
and let me just do some formatting to
make this look pretty
each set of parentheses corresponds to a
new row so let's enter all the data that
we'll need for this table
employee ID number two will be
Squidward
tentacles
Squidward's hourly pay will be maybe a
solid fifteen dollars
Squidward's higher date
the year 2023 January
I think January 3rd is good
all right so that is the next row let's
work on employee number three
employee number three will be a
SpongeBob
last name will be
Square Pants
SpongeBob's hourly pay will be 12.50
SpongeBob's higher date is the year 2023
January 4th
employee for
will be Patrick
star
Patrick's hourly pay will be 12.50 as
well
higher day
2023 January
5th
okay last employee
employee ID number five
first name Sandy
last name
cheeks
Sandy's hourly pay will be 17.25 she'll
be an assistant manager
Sandy's start date will be the year 2023
January 6th we can execute this
statement to insert multiple rows all at
once
yep here's our table
we have five rows each corresponding to
a different employee we have Mr Krabs
Squidward SpongeBob Patrick and Sandy
I'm going to demonstrate what happens
when we attempt to insert a row with
missing data
I will insert employee number six
their first name is Sheldon
last name Plankton but we will not
insert an hourly rate of pay or a higher
date here's what will happen
so we have an error
column count doesn't match the value at
count at Row one we're missing data for
our hourly pay and higher date you could
insert just select columns that is done
by adding after the name of the table
add a set of parentheses then name the
columns you would like to insert data
into
all we're adding is an employee ID
first name
then last name
okay now we've inserted a new employee
but there is data missing and that's
okay we plan on hiring Mr Plankton but
we have not yet negotiated an hourly pay
or start date we still need to run a
background check on him but we want to
add him to the system at least so if you
ever need to insert data into a row but
you need to Omit certain columns you can
simply just list the name of the columns
you would like to sort data into
all right everybody that is how to
insert rows into a table in MySQL
hey everybody in this video I'm going to
show you how we can select data from a
table to query all of the data from the
table we would type select asterisk
meaning all from the name of the table
in my case we have table employees this
statement select all from employees will
give me all columns and all rows but
sometimes you may not want all of the
data here's a scenario your boss gives
you a task of retrieving the full name
of every employee well we don't need
employee ID hourly pay or higher date
for that right we just need a list of
the first and last names of our
employees table in place of the asterisk
meaning all we can select specific
columns such as first name and last name
we have all of the first and last names
from our employees table you can change
up the order of the columns too this
time I would like last name
then first name
with our query this returned all of the
last and first names of all the
employees point being you can select
specific columns depending on what
you're looking for or everything with
the asterisk there is a clause known as
the where Clause if we're looking for
something specific
let's add where
then what are we looking for exactly we
can write some criteria let's select all
from employees where employee ID equals
one then end your statement with a
semicolon
this will give us a specific employee
the employee that has an ID of one if I
set employee ID to B2 that would give us
Squidward
three would be SpongeBob 4. Patrick I
think you get the idea here's an
exercise let's find all the data from
employees where the first name equals
SpongeBob
where first name equals
Sponge Bob
this query will return employee ID3 the
first name last name hourly pay and
higher date here's another example let's
find all employees that have an hourly
pay greater than or equal to 15. our
criteria will be where
hourly
pay
is greater than we'll use the greater
than operator
or equal to
15.
this returns three employees
Mr Krabs Squidward and Sandy
all three of them have an hourly pay of
15 per hour or greater it is possible
your query can return multiple results
let's find anybody that has a higher
date
less than or equal to
perhaps the year 2023
January 3rd
this query returns two results
Eugene Krabs and Squidward Tentacles
they both match this criteria and in
this case we use the less than or equals
to operator another operator you should
know about is the not comparison
operator it's an exclamation point and
an equal sign we will check if something
is not equal
let's find where employee ID does not
equal one
who are all the employees that have an
ID not equal to one
that gives a Squidward SpongeBob Patrick
Sandy and Plankton
on the other hand if I set this to one
that would give us Mr Krabs that is the
not comparison operator if you need to
check if something is not equal
in this next example let's pretend that
we're human resources we need to find
any employees that do not have a higher
date and then begin the paperwork for
them currently Plankton's hourly pay and
higher date are both set to null null
meaning no value
in place of saying you know higher date
equals null in place of using the equal
sign we would type is select all from
employees where higher date is null
that would return Sheldon Plankton
because his higher date is null
not equals null that doesn't work
it would be is null
you could even say is not null
that would return every employee that
does have a higher date all right
everybody so that is how to query data
from a table select whatever you're
looking for it can be everything
or specific columns
from a table of your choosing where the
results equal some criteria that you set
it really depends on what you're looking
for and that is how to query data from a
table
hey everybody in this video I'm going to
show you how we can update and delete
data from a table
in my example we have a table of
employees however Sheldon Plankton is
missing some information and hourly pay
and a higher date let's update those
fields to update some data in a table we
would use the update keyword
the name of the table
employees in my example
then set which column would we like to
interact with first let's interact with
hourly pay set
hourly
pay
let's pay Plankton 10 and 25 cents per
hour we should probably add a where
Clause I need to specifically select
Plankton where
let's select his employee ID where
employee ID equals six
then semicolon 10 the statement
you could also select Plankton by his
first name or last name as well when I
execute the script
Plankton's hourly pay is now 10.25 cents
per hour
to update multiple columns you can
change more than one field at once after
your first change you can add a comma
then change another field
let's change Plankton's higher date to
be the following higher date equals
23-0 Dash
zero seven
I'll make his hourly pay 10.50 I'm
feeling generous
here we are Plankton's hourly pay is now
ten dollars fifty cents his higher date
is January 7th 2023.
to set a field to null meaning no value
you would just say equals null for
example let's take Plankton's higher
date
set the higher date equal to null
Plankton's higher date is now null
so maybe we're gonna fire him or
something
in this next example I'll give you a
demonstration but you don't want to
follow along to update all of the rows
within a column you would exclude the
where clause
if I were to set hourly pay equal to
10.25 that would affect all of the rows
after executing this statement
the hourly pay for everybody is now
10.25. that's an example of how you
could set a column to be one consistent
value
to delete a row from a table
you would type delete
from the name of the table
now don't write just the statement it
will delete all rows in your table
here's an example do not do this I will
delete from employees
there my whole table is gone do not do
this be sure to add a where Clause when
deleting from a table otherwise this
will delete all your rows where
employee ID
equals six
yep and Plankton is no longer there
all right everybody that is a super
quick video on how to update and delete
data from a table
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
explain Auto commit commit and rollback
Auto commit is a mode by default Auto
commit is set to on whenever you execute
a transaction within MySQL that
transaction is saved what if we were to
make a transaction and we need to undo
that transaction for example what if we
accidentally delete all of the rows of
this table don't do what I do but I'll
give you a demonstration I accidentally
type in delete from employees but I
forget to add a where Clause well all my
rows are now gone how do I undo these
changes well what we're going to do is
set auto commit
to equal off
with this setting set to off our
transactions will not save automatically
we would need to manually save each
transaction it creates a save point so
to say
I'm going to create a save point by
typing commit
then execute now I'm going to select my
table select all from the name of my
table
then I'm going to go ahead and delete
all the rows
delete from employees
oh shoot but I forgot to add a where
Clause my whole table is gone now
luckily we created a safe point with
that commit statement
to undo these changes
I can execute the roll back statement
this will restore my current transaction
back to the previous save point where we
used commit now if I were to select all
from the name of my table
our table is back to what it previously
was
and again to save any changes
let's say I delete my whole table again
delete from
employees
if I want to save this change I would
commit
then again I will select my table
and that last change is now saved my
whole table is gone
so yeah that is auto commit commit and
roll back by default Auto commit is set
to be on any transactions after
executing are saved if that mode is set
to off you can commit any changes
manually to undo any changes use that
rollback statement so yeah that is auto
commit commit and roll back in MySQL
hey everybody in this topic I have a
super quick video on getting the current
date and time in MySQL let's create a
temporary table at the end of this topic
we'll delete it
create table I'll name this table test
we will have three columns
the current date I'll name the column my
date the data type is date
my time the data type is time
then we'll combine both
my
date time the data type is date time
let's create this table it was created
successfully then I will select all from
our table test
we have three columns
a date a time and a date time which
combines both so how do we get the
current date maybe we need to create a
timestamp of when some event happened
maybe a higher date for our employees so
I'm going to insert
into the name of my table test
some values
for the current date there is a built-in
function
current underscore date then add a set
of parentheses this function will return
the current date
for the current time there is a current
time function add a set of parentheses
to the end of that function
for the date time you could just say now
the net a set of parentheses
after inserting this row let's select
all from our table test
here's the current date of me filming
this video October 21st 2022 the time is
seven in the morning
the current date time is October 21st
2022 7 in the morning a date time would
probably be good for some sort of
transaction you need to record for the
time being I'm going to set the current
time to be null as well as the date time
to be null now if you were to take your
current date then add plus one
this part of my statement would refer to
tomorrow
October 22nd if you were to take your
current date minus one that would
technically be yesterday October 20th
you could do something similar with your
time and date time you can add or
subtract seconds but I think that's
pretty self-explanatory we don't need
this test table anymore so we can delete
it
drop table test
and it's gone
all right everybody so that was a super
quick topic but I thought I needed to
cover it that is how to get the current
date time and date time in MySQL
hey everybody I have a quick video on
the unique constraint the unique
constraint ensures that all values in a
column are all different that's
basically it we can add this constraint
when we create a table or after let's
create a new table
create
table
let's create a table of products what
products do we offer
we'll list the columns
let's add a product ID
the data type will be int
product name the data type will be
varchar maybe 25 characters then a price
the data type will be decimal
our price will have a Max size of four
digits
and a Precision of two decimal places
to add the unique constraint select a
column after the data type add the
keyword unique
and that's all you have to do with this
keyword unique we can't insert any
product names that are the same they all
have to be well unique let's create this
table
let's say that you forget the unique
keyword then you create the table what
you could do instead
is type alter table the name of the
table
products which we just created
add
constraint
unique
the name of the column within
parentheses
product name
if you forget to add a unique constraint
to a column after you already create the
table this is what you can write
however when I run this
I do have a warning I already have a
unique constraint on that column but
yeah that's how you would add a unique
constraint to a column in a table you
have already created let's select our
table select all from
products
we have a product ID column product name
and a price let's insert all of our
values
insert into the name of our table which
is products
values will insert maybe four rows
we'll need a product ID name then a
price for a product name we have a
hamburger and the product ID I'm just
making up a number is 100.
the name is hamburger
the price will be 3.99
fries will be our next item
then we have prize
the price will be 189.
will be soda
the price is one dollar even
103 will be ice cream
the price will be 149. Let's test the
unique constraint that we have added to
the product name column suppose that I
forget that I have fries on the menu
already
and I will add another row
104 frize 189 actually let me change the
price to maybe something different like
175. here's what happens when I attempt
to add two values that are the same
duplicate entry fries for Key Products
dot product name MySQL is telling us
that we have a duplicate under the
product name column we have fries twice
since we added the unique constraint all
values in this column must be different
if I were to remove the last column
where we have that duplicate
well then this would run just fine
now let's select everything
from products
yeah there we go here are the products
we have a hamburger fries soda and ice
cream all on the menu so yeah that's the
unique constraint you can add that
constraint when you create a table or
after whatever column has that unique
constraint all the values need to be
different so yeah that's the unique
constraint in MySQL
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
explain the not null constraint the
notch null constraint can be added to a
column when you create a table whenever
we enter a new row the value within that
column can't be null for example I have
table products we have a hamburger fries
soda ice cream if I were to recreate
this table I would type something like
this
create table
products
I would list the columns we have product
ID the data type is integer
product name the data type is varchar I
believe I set this to be 25 last time
then price
that is a decimal
we gave this column a Max size of four
digits and a Precision of two any column
that I do not want to have null values I
will simply just add not no this is a
constraint now I've already created this
table so I'm not going to execute the
statement but that's how you would
create a table that has the notch null
constraint after the column name you
just type not null
to add the not null constraint to a
table that already exists you would
instead type alter table the name of the
table
modify
the name of the column
the data type of the column
in this case decimal
four comma two
then not null
it's a little bit different than the
unique constraint in the last topic so
let's execute the statement
that seemed to work
let's add a new item to the menu I will
select everything from my products table
select from products
let's add a new item to the menu and we
will test that not null constraint
insert into products
values
we have 104 product ID 104 will be
how about a cookie
I'm not going to set a price I will say
null for the price maybe I'm not decided
on what the price is yet after executing
the statement well we have an error
column price cannot be null
since we said that not null constraint
on the product price we can't enter a
null value we could set this to be zero
that's acceptable but it can't be null
so yeah everybody that's the not null
constraint it's a useful constraint to
verify input if there's any column that
you don't want to have any null values
just add that constraint and yeah that
is the not null constraint in MySQL
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
explain the check constraint the check
constraint is used to limit what values
can be placed in a column for example I
live in the United States depending on
which state you live in there is a
minimum hourly wage that employers have
to pay in this example let's set an
hourly pay to our employees table every
employee needs to be paid at least the
minimum wage in that region and we can
do that with the check constraint we
have our table of employees if I were to
recreate this table it would look like
this
I think that was pretty close to add a
check to a column at the end of our
table this is what we would write
check
then within parentheses what sort of
condition do we want
let's check to see if our hourly
pay column is greater than or equal to
maybe ten dollars per hour that will be
the minimum wage in this region this
would work if we were to create this
table however it's typically a good idea
to give your check a name just in case
you need to drop it later you can easily
identify it so precede check with
constraint then a constraint name what
about
chk meaning check underscore
hourly
pay
this check will be known as check hourly
pay so we can identify it then we can
drop it or make any changes to it if we
need to I do already have an employees
table so I'm not going to execute this
statement but to add a check constraint
to a table you would just add a row like
this to the bottom if you instead need
to add a check constraint to a table
that already exists this would be the
syntax
alter table the name of the table
add constraint
then we need a unique name for this
constraint
check hourly pay
that's fine
then the check within parentheses
hourly
pay is greater than or equal to 10.
ten dollars per hour
okay let's run this
yeah that appears to have worked I'm
going to select all from employees
let's take a look at our table
then we will attempt to add a new
employee
insert into
employees
values
we need an employee ID first name last
name hourly pay then a higher date
employee ID will be six
first name
Sheldon
plankton
for hourly pay let's attempt to pay
Plankton maybe five dollars per hour
then a higher date
[Music]
2023-01-07 let's see if that check
constraint kicks in we're paying
Plankton under ten dollars per hour
yeah it doesn't appear that we can do so
check constraint check hourly pay is
violated now let's pay Plankton ten
dollars per hour
yeah that worked just fine if you need
to delete a check you would type alter
table the name of the table
drop check then the name that you gave
that check in my case it was check
hourly pay
and that check has been dropped yeah
everybody that is the check constraint
it's used to limit what values can be
placed in a column it's another useful
method for checking input and that is
the check constraint in MySQL
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
explain the default constraint when
inserting a new row if we do not specify
a value for a column by default we can
add some value that we set here's an
example let's select all from our
products table select all from products
in an earlier example we have a table of
products a few items on the menu for
sale are hamburgers fries soda and ice
cream let's add a few items on the menu
that would be free this could include
napkins straws forks and spoons
something you would commonly see at a
fast food restaurant if we're not using
the default constraint we would have to
enter in those prices manually
so let's insert into our table products
our values
product ID 104 will be
a straw the price will be zero dollars
and zero cents
let's do this all together
we have 105.
107.
product number 105 will be a napkin
the napkin is zero dollar zero cents
106 is a plastic fork
again zero dollars and zero cents
107 is a plastic spoon
the price is zero dollars and zero cents
then I will select all from my products
table
here's our new products table we have
our four items that actually cost
something then our free items which are
included with whatever we buy in place
of explicitly stating a price one way in
which we can make our lives easier if
we're adding a bunch of free items to
the menu we could set a default
constraint where if we don't explicitly
set a price the price will default to be
zero it will be free so I'm going to
undo everything that we just did
delete from products
where product ID is greater than or
equal to 104.
and then we can execute that statement
if we were recreating this table with
the default constraint we would type
create table the name of the table
products in this case
add our columns we have a product ID
the data type is integer
we have a product
name
the data type is VAR chart and I forgot
what the size was
looks like 25.
than a price
which is a decimal
Max digit size of four Precision of two
now let's use the default constraint
after the column you would like to add
that constraint to type default then
some value I will set the default value
to be zero dollars and zero cents or you
could just say zero too that'd be fine
you would just add this constraint when
creating a new table however I do
already have a products table so this
technically wouldn't work because that
table already exists now to alter a
table to include that constraint you
would instead type alter table the name
of the table
alter the name of the column price
set
default constraint then the value so
zero
and that appears to have worked let's
select our products table select all
from
products
then we will insert some new rows
insert
into
products
than our values
so we had four rows
104.
that was a straw
105 was a napkin
106.
was a fork
107.
is a spoon then finished the statement
with a semicolon so since we set that
default constraint we don't need to
explicitly list the price but we are
missing one thing though
when I execute this statement the column
count doesn't match
so when we insert into products
we will list what we're inserting
explicitly the product ID
and the product name after our table
name within parentheses type
product ID then product name now this
should work
yeah and here's our products table with
our four inserts all of the prices were
set to zero and we did not need to
explicitly state that this time if you
don't specify a value you'll use
whatever the default is here's another
example I think you'll like this one
let's say we have a table of
transactions after inserting a new
transaction we will insert a timestamp
of when that transaction took place and
that time stamp will be the default
create table
transactions
at the end of this topic we will delete
this table so don't get too attached to
it
we will have three columns
transaction
ID which will be of the data type
integer
a transaction amount let's just say
amount
the data type will be decimal
five digits Precision of two is good
then a transaction
date
the data type will be date actually
let's make this date time I'd like to
include the time of when this
transaction happened now for the default
constraint after the date time let's add
default then the Now function we don't
need to explicitly add the date and time
that will be done automatically which is
kind of cool
so I'm going to create this table
let's select all from transactions
if we're going to insert some values
we'll need at least a transaction ID and
amount the transaction date will be
included automatically
so let's insert into
transactions
some values let's do one at a time
the first transaction of the day will
have a transaction ID of one I suppose a
customer came in and bought a hamburger
and a soda for a total of 4.99
then we do need to list the transaction
ID then the amount
after our table name add transaction ID
then amount
so let's run this
yeah cool so there's our transaction ID
this was order number one the total
amount was 4.99 and we do have a time
stamp of when this transaction occurred
so the second order of the day
will be for a total of 2.89 and that
happened at this time then the third
order of the day
will have a total price of eight dollars
37 cents
yep there we are so we don't need this
table anymore I'm going to drop table
transactions we will recreate this table
in the future but I'd rather start fresh
all right everybody that is the default
constraint when you create a table or
alter a table you can set a default
value of some value you specify then
whenever you insert a row that value
will be included automatically which is
pretty useful but yeah that is the
default constraint in MySQL
hey everybody in this topic I'm going to
explain the primary key constraint in
MySQL the primary key constraint can be
applied to a column where each value in
that column must both be unique and not
null it's typically used as a unique
identifier for example I live in the
United States each citizen within the
United States has a unique social
security number there is a strong
possibility that two citizens in the
United States share the same first name
and last name John Smith for example if
we're trying to find John Smith well
which one are we referring to we could
instead search for a citizen with a
unique social security number then we
know for sure we have the right person
that's kind of the same concept with the
primary key also a table can only have
one primary key constraint here's an
example let's create a temporary table
of transactions create table
transactions
there will only be two columns
a transaction
ID the data type is int I will set the
transaction ID to be the primary key
there can be no duplicate transaction
IDs with the same value and none of them
can be null then we will also have an
amount how much was each transaction for
the data type will be decimal
Max size of five digits Precision of two
and that is good enough
then I will select all from our table
transactions
here's our table now to add a primary
key constraint to a table that already
exists this is the syntax alter table
the name of your table
add
constraint
the name of the constraint primary key
within parentheses the column we would
like to apply the primary key to
transaction ID in this example then
semicolon however we have already
applied the primary key constraint to
our transaction ID column so this isn't
going to work but that's how you would
add a primary key constraint to a table
that already exists Let's test that
theory of that limit of one primary key
per table I'll attempt to add a primary
key to our amount column
and it does not appear we can do so
multiple a primary key to find so like I
said you can only have one primary key
per table
and that is typically used as the
identifier let's take a look at our
transactions let's populate this table
with a few rows
we will insert into our table
transactions
some values all we need is a transaction
ID and an amount
for our transaction ID I'll just make up
a number all transactions will start in
the thousands
this will be our first transaction
so the amount a customer bought a
hamburger and a soda the total was 4.99
so let's run this
there is our first row for the second
transaction the transaction ID will be
the customer bought fries and a soda for
289.
so that appears to have worked as well
now the next customer buys fries and ice
cream for 3.38 cents Let's test that
theory of each transaction ID having to
be unique I'll attempt to insert this
row with the same transaction ID as the
previous row
then let's see what happens
duplicate entry 1001 for key
transactions.primary yeah it appears
that we cannot have two rows with the
same primary key they each need to be
unique let's change the transaction ID
to 1002. that appears to have worked now
the next transaction will be a hamburger
and soda for 4.49 I will attempt to set
the transaction ID to be null
which we can't do either column
transaction ID cannot be null each value
that's set as a primary key can't be
null and it needs to be unique so this
transaction will have a transaction ID
of 1003
two rows can share similar data we have
two customers that bought both a
hamburger and a soda for the same price
but each transaction is uniquely
identified by the transaction ID which
we set as the primary key let's say that
somebody comes in to request a refund
and they give us a transaction ID well
we can easily look that up and refund
them whatever the amount was
select amount
from
transactions
where
transaction
ID equals 1003.
so we are going to refund to the
customer 4.99
well all right then everybody that is
the primary key constraint it's most
commonly used as a unique identifier you
usually want a primary key in every
table you make each value within a
column that is set as the primary key
cannot be no and it needs to be unique
there can only be one primary key per
table typically it's used as a unique
identifier for each row and yeah
everybody that is the primary key
constraint in MySQL
hey everybody in today's topic I'm going
to explain the auto increment attribute
in MySQL the auto increment attribute
can be applied to a column that is set
as a key whenever we insert a new row
our primary key can be populated
automatically then each subsequent row
is auto incremented I'm going to
recreate this table transactions but
first I need to drop it
drop table transactions
then we will recreate this table but
apply that auto increment feature
create table transactions
there were two columns a transaction
ID the data type was int and an amount
the data type was decimal
five digits Precision of two
the auto increment feature can only be
applied to a column that is set as a key
our transaction ID will set to be the
primary key to apply the auto increment
feature add the keyword Auto
increment
Now by default the primary key is going
to be set to 1.
so after creating this table I will
select all from transactions
okay we have successfully created our
table then I will insert some values
insert into
transactions
R values so we don't need to explicitly
insert a transaction ID that'll be done
for us automatically but we still need
an amount
I will insert 4.99 for the first amount
since we're not inserting all of the
values into a row explicitly we would
need to specify what column this value
is for
that is for the amount
okay let us execute this and take a look
yeah so the transaction ID was set to
one even though we did not manually
insert that value
let's insert the next amount
so we have 289
yep transaction ID 2 is 289
3 38
transaction ID3
4.99
transaction ID of four
we could set our primary key to begin at
a different value
to do that we would type alter table the
name of the table
Auto
increment
let's begin at 1000 instead of one
then I'm going to go ahead and drop all
the rows we'll start fresh
delete from
transactions
select all from
okay then let's insert those rows again
and see what happens
insert into
transactions
R values
4.99 was the first amount
this value is for our amount column
now this transaction ID
it begins at one thousand then it should
Auto increment
the next value was 289
our next transaction ID is 1001
then 4.99
all right everybody that is the auto
increment feature it's a keyword that
can be applied to a column that is set
as a key whenever we insert a new row
our key will be incremented by one for
each row that we insert but yeah that is
auto increment in MySQL
hey everybody so in this topic I'm going
to explain what the foreign key
constraint is a foreign key think of it
as a primary key from one table that can
be found within a different table using
a foreign key we can establish a link
between two tables there's two primary
benefits to this in my transactions
table if I were to take a look at the
customer ID of who initiated this
transaction I could refer to the
customers table then find the first and
last name of that customer we can do
that when we reach the topic of joins
but in this video we're going to focus
more or less on just creating foreign
Keys another benefit when you create a
foreign key constraint that would create
a link between two tables which prevents
any actions that would destroy that link
between them so here's an example I have
three tables employees products and
transactions I'm going to create a new
table of customers I'm going to create
this table and speed it up feel free to
pause the video if you need to
here's my table we have a customer ID
which is the primary key a first name
and a last name let's populate our
customers table
we have three customers Fred fish Larry
Lobster bubble bass each has a unique
customer ID we're going to create a link
between our customers table and our
transactions table via our customer ID
I'm going to drop our table transactions
drop table transactions
we will recreate this table but apply
that foreign key constraint so again
I'll speed up the footage
now what I'm going to do is create a
third column to hold our customer ID
and the data type isn't I would like to
add a foreign key constraint to our
customer ID column
on the next line
I will type
foreign key list the column we're
applying this foreign key constraint too
within parentheses customer ID
references
our second table the customers table
customers
then the column of the primary key which
was customer
ID and that's all you need to do
then I will select all from my table
transactions
here is our table
we have a transaction ID this is the
primary key the amount of the
transaction then the customer ID of who
initiated that transaction our customer
ID column is the foreign key it points
to the customers table based on what the
customer ideas we can find the first and
last name of that customer to find any
active foreign keys
go to your table in this case
transactions underneath foreign keys
this section will display any foreign
keys that are applied to this table we
currently have one
transactions underscore ibfk underscore
one if you need to drop a foreign key
you would type alter table the name of
the table that has the foreign key
constraint that would be transactions
drop
foreign key then the name of this
foreign key
transactions underscore
ibfk underscore one
and that foreign key should be gone
you could also give your foreign key a
unique name
alter table the name of the table
add
constraint
then some unique name let's rename that
constraint as FK underscore
customer
ID
foreign
key
the name of the column customer ID
references
the name of the second table
customers then the column that has the
primary key
customer
ID
so to apply a foreign key to a table
that already exists this would be the
syntax you don't necessarily need to
name the constraint
but if you would like to just add that
line add constraint then some unique
name
let's add this foreign key constraint to
a table that already exists
it worked if I were to refresh my
navigator window we now have a foreign
key and it's the one that we gave a name
to foreign key customer ID
what we're going to do is drop the rows
from our transactions table then
reinsert them but we will add a value
for each foreign key
so let's get rid of this
delete from transactions
then select all from
transactions
here we are okay so let's insert some
new rows
I do want to set auto increment to be a
thousand so I'm going to do that before
we insert some rows alter table
transactions
Auto
increment equals one thousand
so let's take a look at transactions
then we will insert some new rows
insert into
transactions
R values
we had four transactions
we will need an amount and the customer
ID of who initiated the transaction
the first order is for 4.99
customer number three initiated this
transaction
the second order is 289
customer number two initiated that
transaction
this is also customer three they
returned back the same day
4.99
customer number one initiated that
transaction
we have our primary key from the
transactions table as well as our
foreign key
each of these customer IDs references
the customer ID column from the
customers table we won't get to explore
that until we reach the topic on joins
so the other benefit of a foreign key
constraint is that we now have a link
between our transactions table and to
the customers table MySQL will prevent
any actions that would destroy that link
between them unless we explicitly drop
that foreign key constraint I'm going to
delete some of our customers
delete from customers
where
customer
ID equals three
we were right it doesn't appear that we
can do so cannot delete or update a
parent row a foreign key constraint
fails
so yeah that's the foreign key
constraint it's a primary key from one
table that's found also within a
different table but when we're working
with that different table we would refer
to that key as a foreign key we'll have
more practice with this when we reach
the topic on joins but yeah that is the
foreign key constraint in MySQL
hey everybody welcome back again in
today's video I'm going to be explaining
joins in MySQL a join is a clause that
is used to combine rows from two or more
tables based on a related column between
them such as a foreign key here's an
example I have two tables a table of
transactions and a table of customers
think of these two tables as a Venn
diagram transactions will be the table
on the left customers will be the table
on the right whatever data they have in
common is the middle part of our Venn
diagram for my demonstration to make
more sense I will need to add a few
extra rows feel free to pause the video
if you need to catch up I will insert
into transactions a new row the amount
is one dollar the customer ID is null so
not all transactions can have a customer
ID that foreign key here's a scenario
suppose that somebody comes in pays for
a soda with cash well we wouldn't have a
customer ID right if a customer instead
paid with a credit card we could track
who that customer was there may be a
customer ID who initiated that credit
card charge I'm going to insert this row
and here's our new transactions table
not all rows have a customer ID
then let's add one more customer
insert into customers first name last
name will be poppy Puff
let's select all of our customers now
not all transactions have a customer ID
and if not all customers have ever
initiated a transaction they could be
registered as a customer but they have
never actually bought anything yet using
joins let's take a look at what data
these two tables have in common we'll
discuss inner joins left joins and right
joins let's begin with an inner join to
create an inner join between these two
tables
you would type select all from which
table would you like to be on the left
think of that Venn diagram our
transactions table will be on the left
from transactions inner join
whatever table you would like to be on
the right in this case customers
on we're going to join these two tables
together by the foreign key from
transactions we'll take
transactions.the name of the foreign key
column which was customer ID
equals the table on the right dot the
name of the primary key column which was
customer ID
then we will execute the statement and
here's our new table
we have created an inner join from these
two tables based solely on what they
have in common if you remember we don't
have that Row for that transaction for
one dollar that doesn't have a customer
ID as well as our customer poppy puff
there's no role for her in this table
what we're telling MySQL is to select
all rows from these two tables that have
matching customer ideas so that's why
some data was excluded one thing you
could do with a join this applies to
left joins and right joins as well you
don't necessarily need to display every
single column from both tables you can
select specific columns
let's select our transaction ID the
amount
the first name
then the last name
this would make it a lot easier to find
the first and last name of who initiated
a transaction at a given time we know
who bought which order so that is an
inner join join together any matching
rows based on some Link in this case
we're joining these two tables together
by their customer ID
now with the left join we are going to
display everything from the table on the
left but let's select all
with the left join we will display
everything from the table on the left
our transactions however if there is a
matching customer ID pull in any
relevant data from the table on the
right even though there's no customer ID
with this latest row we're still going
to display it with a left join but
there's no data to pull in from the
right table because there's no
registered customer ID
with the right join
we will display the entire table on the
right if there's any matches we will
pull in any matching rows from the left
we are displaying all of our customers
if any of these customers ever initiated
a transaction we will include the data
from those transactions we still have
poppy puff in our table but she has no
relevant transactions she never
initiated one so yeah everybody those
are joins a join is used to combine rows
from two or more tables based on a
related column between them such as a
foreign key like customer ID and that is
a quick introduction to joins in MySQL
hello again everyone today I will be
explaining functions in MySQL a function
is a stored program that you can pass
parameters into to return a value if you
look on mysql's main website there is a
huge comprehensive list of functions in
this video I'll only be showing you a
few of the more useful ones for
beginners but just so you know there's a
lot of functions out there that do all
sorts of things what if I would like to
count how many transactions took place
on a certain date to do that we can use
the count function
select count parentheses within my set
of parentheses I can place a column then
calculate how many rows are within that
column let's calculate amount we will
count how many rows are within the
column amount
then we will need a table from our table
transactions so you could add a where
Clause 2 like where transaction date is
on a certain date but I want to keep
this video as simple as possible
this function will return all of the
rows within this column amount which is
five we have five transactions within
this table now this column header is
kind of ugly the column name is count
the amount column you could give a
column an alias by adding as then some
nickname let's say count it's not
necessary but if you want to make the
column header look pretty or rename it
as something you could do that
count five we could even rename this
column as
today is
transactions
that works too do whatever you want to
do
let's find you the maximum value of our
column amount by using the max function
within the set of parentheses pass in
your amount column I will give this
column an alias of
maximum
and that is the maximum amount the
largest order was 4.99 there's also Min
to find the minimum
as minimum
the smallest order was for one dollar
you could do average which is AVG
as average the average order is three
dollars and 45 cents
we can find the sum of a column by using
the sum function
as some
the sum of all of our transactions was
17 and 25 cents for this next example
we're going to concatenate the first and
last name of our employees
select all from
employees
we have two columns one for a first name
the other for a last name we're going to
combine these two columns together with
the concat function then create a new
column named full name here's how to do
that
select
concat
first name
last name
then I'll add an alias as ball name
here's what we have so far so we are
concatenating the first and last names
of our employees uh however we should
separate each name with the space
within our concat function
I'll add a space character
surrounded with commas to separate each
argument
there that's much better
so that is the concat function we can
concatenate values together such as if
you need a column for somebody's full
name but yeah those are just a few
functions there's still many more we
haven't covered but these are a few of
the beginner ones you may be interested
in but yeah those are functions in MySQL
why hello again everybody guess who it's
me again today I will be explaining
logical operators in MySQL I would think
of them as keywords that are used to
combine more than one condition for my
examples to make more sense I will add
one more column a job column so let's
alter our table of employees alter table
employees add
column job the data type will be
varchar25 I'll add this column after our
hourly pay column
then select all from my table employees
here is our job column
let's add some jobs to our employees
let's update employees
set job equal to Let's select Mr Krabs
he will be a manager
then be sure to add a where Clause
employee ID equals one
Mr Krabs is a manager
Squidward will be a cashier employee ID
equals two
SpongeBob employee ID3 he will be a cook
Patrick will also be a cook
Sandy will be an assistant manager
let's abbreviate the word assistant
manager
Plankton Plankton will be a janitor
how is this related to logical operators
you're wondering well using logical
operators we can check more than one
condition suppose that our boss wants us
to find any Cooks that were hired before
January 5th how can we write a query
that can satisfy those two conditions
here's how we will use the and logical
operator
select all
from our table employees
using a where Clause we will write two
conditions find any employees where the
higher date is less than
the year 2023
January 5th
so far this would give us three results
Mr Krabs Squidward and SpongeBob from
these three employees how do we find any
Cooks well we can add the and logical
operator
and we can write some other condition
job is equal to
cook
there we have SpongeBob
he is a cook that was hired before
January 5th
so that's the and logical operator you
will return any results that match these
two criteria another logical operator is
or you can check more than one condition
as long as one of those conditions is
true that row will be true let's find
any cooks or cashiers
where job is equal to cook
that gives us both SpongeBob and Patrick
they're both Cooks
or job is equal to
cashier
that would also include Squidward he's
not a cook but he is a cashier with the
or logical operator only one condition
needs to be true whereas with the
andological operator both conditions
must be true so that's the main
difference between the and as well as or
logical operators
with the not logical operator not is a
little different not basically reverses
anything you say let's find any
employees that are not a manager
where not
job equals
manager
we have all of our employees besides Mr
Krabs we have cashiers Cooks assistant
managers and janitors
you can combine logical operators too
let's find anybody that's not a manager
and not an assistant manager let's add
and not job equals
assistant manager
we have everybody besides a manager and
besides an assistant manager Mr Krabs
and Sandy are not within the results
so that is the not logical operator it
basically reverses whatever condition
you write
there's also between
is used within a single column
it's very similar to the andalogical
operator except people prefer to use the
between logical operator when working
with the same column just because of its
readability let's find any employees
where the higher date is between January
4th and January 7th where higher date
between two values
0 1
0 4
and
0 1-07
so we have SpongeBob Patrick Sandy
Sheldon
there's also the in logical operator we
can find any values that are within a
set let's find where job is in
cook
cashier
or a janitor
yep we have a cashier a cook a cook and
a janitor there is more than one way to
write a query where you need to match
more than one condition really the best
way depends on your data set basically
speaking logical operators are used to
check more than one condition but
they're done so in different ways
depending on the logical operator that
you're using but yeah those are logical
operators in MySQL
hello again people today I'm going to be
explaining Wild Card characters there
are two the percent and the underscore
each of these is used to substitute one
or more characters in a string here's an
example I have a table of employees what
if I need to find any employees whose
first name begins with an S well you
would think you could write something
like this
where first name
is equal to s
now this technically doesn't work here
what we're doing is telling MySQL to
find any first names that are equal to
the character s if I instead need to
find any first names that begin with the
character S I can type S then the
percent wildcard operator the percent
wildcard operator represents any number
of random characters but there's one
more change we need to make still
replace the equals operator with the
like operator like when used with an
aware Clause searches any patterns we
will return any first names that begin
with the letter s so the results are
Squidward SpongeBob Sandy Sheldon their
first names all begin with the letter s
we could do this with dates too let's
find any
higher dates in the year 2023
technically that would return everything
in my example because all the higher
dates are in 2023. we can even find if
something ends with a character let's
find any last names that end with the
character r
that would return Patrick star star with
an r at the end you could add more than
one character let's find any first names
that start with SP
then change last name to first name
that would return one result SpongeBob
SP on the other hand we have the
underscore wildcard character the
underscore wildcard character represents
one random letter let's find any jobs
that have one random character followed
by oh okay
that would return any Cooks the
underscore kind of reminds me of that
game Wheel of Fortune MySQL is going to
attempt to fill in any blanks with a
matching character if we had two
underscores
well there technically wouldn't be any
matches MySQL would technically be
looking for a five-letter word where the
middle three characters are oh okay but
there's no matches
here's another example find any higher
dates in January
higher date is like the year is going to
be random we have four digits one two
three four
a dash character zero one
Dash then a day of the month so two
underscores
again that would return pretty much all
of our employees they were all hired in
January maybe we don't care about the
year or the month but we care about the
day of the month
so let's replace the month with
underscores
zero two
that would return Mr Krabs zero three
that would be Squidward
now you could combine these two
different wild cards together too let's
take a look at our jobs
let's find any jobs where the second
character is an a
I know it's kind of a weird example but
hopefully it'll make sense
select all from employees where job is
like now we're going to combine these
two wild characters the second character
has to be an a
we could use the underscore for the
first character a then any amount of
random characters afterwards
that would return a manager cashier or
janitor
so yeah those are wild card characters
you can use these to substitute one or
more characters in a string it's pretty
helpful if you need to find if a string
starts with some value or ends with some
value and those are wild card characters
and MySQL
hey everyone I have a super quick video
on the order by Clause the order by
Clause sorts the results of a query in
either ascending or descending order
based on which column we list here's an
example I have a list of employees how
can I list all of these employees
alphabetically currently they are listed
by their employee ID well at the end of
my statement I can add an order by
Clause order buy then a column to order
our Rose by let's order all of these
employees by their last name
Now by default they will be ordered in
ascending order or alphabetical order if
you're working with characters for
descending order or reverse alphabetical
order just add desc for descending
now these employees are listed in
Reverse alphabetical order or descending
order for us sending order that would be
ASC but that is the default so you don't
explicitly need ASC
let's order these employees by their
first name
these employees are listed
alphabetically by their first name
let's do reverse alphabetical order
yeah there we are let's order these
employees by their higher date
higher date and ascending order
you don't even technically need that
keyword ascending it would still work
just fine now descending
I think we have the hang of it now let's
select all from transactions there's one
more thing I want to show you
select all from transactions
we have two transactions with the same
amount
let's order by amount
when ordering a column if two values
share the same amount we can add an
additional column to compare by order by
amount but if two amounts are the same
order by maybe
customer ID
these two rows are now flipped
so you can order by more than one column
if two columns share the same amount
then order by some other column
then you can add ascending descending
however you want to order your table
so yeah that is the order by Clause you
can order your rows by some column you
specify in ascending or descending order
but yeah that is the order by clause in
MySQL
hello it's me again today I will be
explaining the limit Clause the limit
Clause is used to limit the number of
records that are quarried it's very
useful if you're working with a lot of
data one use is that you can display a
large data set on different pages also
known as pagination here's an example
I have a few customers
not very many I'm working with a small
data set if I would ever need to limit
the amount of customers that are
displayed I can add a limit Clause then
set how many I would like to display
I would like the first customer limit
one
that would return Fred fish in my
example if I need the first two that
would be Fred then Larry
three is Fred Larry bubble that's kind
of a weird first name
and then four would be poppy currently
these records are organized by customer
ID we could combine the limit Clause
with the order by clause
let's order by last name
then limit one
that would return bubble bass it's an
alphabetical order
or we could do last name
descending limit one
poppy puff has the name and least
alphabetical order I guess basically
speaking limit limits the number of
records that are returned it's very
useful in combination with the order by
clause which we learned about in the
previous topic now with the limit Clause
you can add an offset
limit
one one
the first number is the offset limit to
one record after the first that should
technically return Larry Lobster
yep Larry so limit two would add an
offset of two
which returns bubble Bass
limit three would return poppy puff
using an offset would be very helpful
when working with a large data set if
you need to display your records on
different pages suppose that our data
set is maybe 100 customers I need to
display 10 customers per page so the
first 10 would be just limit 10.
but you know my data set's really small
so it's not going to be apparent if I
need the next set of 10 customers I can
add an offset of 10. although I don't
have that many customers to begin with
the next set of 10 customers would be an
offset of 20 then displayed 10 you know
then 30 40 so on and so forth so yeah
that's the limit Clause you will limit
the results that are queried type limit
then some number you could add an offset
so display some number of Records after
an offset but yeah that is the limit
clause in MySQL
hey welcome back today I will be
explaining the union operator the union
operator combines the results of two or
more select statements I have created
two additional tables I'm only going to
be using them temporarily I'll delete
them once we're done with this example I
have a table of income
we have two columns an income name and
an amount I've just made up some numbers
they're probably not realistic I also
have a table of expenses
here's my table of expenses we have an
expense name and some amount again I
just made up some numbers suppose that
our boss wants us to print a list of all
of our different income versus expenses
all in one window well we can easily do
that with the Union operator after our
first select statement delete the
semicolon add Union
we now have a window with the results of
these two select statements we have
income and expenses let's perform a
similar operation with our employees and
customers table I'm going to drop these
tables though they were only temporary
drop table income
drop table expenses
let's begin Mr Krabs our boss he wants
us to create a list of everybody that
enters the store all employees and all
customers while we can join together
those select statements with the Union
operator but first let's take a look at
each of these tables
select all from employees
we're going to have one problem our
employees table has six columns whereas
our customers table
our customers table has three columns
if you're combining two different select
statements that have a different amount
of columns a union isn't going to work
we have a problem the used select
statements have a different number of
columns in order to join two select
statements together they need the same
number of columns my employees table has
six columns my customers table has three
well we could select distinct columns
all I need is the first name and the
last name of each of these tables
first name last name
and look at that that works we have now
created a list of all of the different
people that enter our store both
employees and customers
there is a different variation of the
Union operator that is Union all that
would include any duplicates if more
than one value is found within each
table
just temporarily I'm going to insert
Plankton into our customers table
insert into customers
some values
customer ID 5 first name Sheldon
last name plankton
select all from customers
Plankton is both in our customers table
and our employees table
now what would happen if I add a union
to those two select statements
with just Union by itself union doesn't
allow duplicates Sheldon Plankton is
only within our list once
with Union all you would include
duplicates
now Sheldon Plankton is in this list
twice
so use whatever is more fitting for your
situation
I'm gonna go ahead and delete Plankton
from this table of customers
all right yeah so that's a union
everybody a union combines the results
of two or more select statements in
order to do so those two or more select
statements need the same number of
columns but yeah that is the union
operator in MySQL
hey everybody today I'm going to be
explaining self joins a self-join is
really just any type of join where you
join together another copy of a table to
itself they're used to compare rows of
the same table they really help with
displaying a hierarchy of data so a self
join you just join another copy of a
table to itself so here's an example I
have a table of customers I'm going to
create another column named referred by
if a customer refer somebody and they
register as a new customer maybe they
get like a free meal or something let's
create a new column within our customers
table
alter table
customers
add
referral ID
the data type will be int
then select all from customers
now let's populate this column
update customers
set
referral ID
equal to one
where customer ID equals to
our first customer Fred fish he was not
referred by anybody that value will be
null however Larry Lobster was referred
by Fred fish
we'll set the referral ID for him to be
won
Larry Lobster was referred by Fred fish
so Fred fish gets a free meal at the
Krusty Krab
now Larry Lobster he's going to refer
both bubble bass and Poppy puff so he'll
get two free meals
set referral ID equal to 2 where
customer ID equals three
and four
Fred fish referred to Larry Lobster
Larry Lobster referred bubble bass and
Poppy puff it makes me think of a
pyramid scheme I'm going to use a
self-joint to replace our referral ID
column with the first and last name of
the customer that referred one of these
people
so I'm going to select all
Now when using a self join
we'll take from our table customers
than inner join
customers basically we're just joining
another copy of a table to itself but
we'll need to give these tables what's
known as an alias a nickname let's say
from customers as maybe a that's the
nickname
inner join customers as b the original
copy of our customers table will be
referred to as a the copy will be B they
are the exact same table but we have two
of them and we'll stitch them together
with a join to link these Tables by the
referral ID and the customer ID I'll add
this additional line on
referral
ID
equals customer ID let's take a look to
see what we have so far
column referral ID in on Clause is
ambiguous
am I referring to the referral ID of
table a or table B I'm referring to the
referral ID of table a what I'll do is
prefix this column name with the name of
my table followed by dot a DOT referral
ID equals I need the customer ID from my
table copy which is known as B I will
prefix B to this customer ID column
the referral ID of table a is linked to
the customer ID of table B oh yeah look
at that we have joined these two tables
the referral ID of table a is linked to
the customer ID of table B
I don't necessarily need all of these
columns we're displaying everything
let's select only specific columns I
would like a customer ID
first name
last name
now we have one problem with our first
name and last name do we mean the first
and last name Columns of table a or
table B let's prefix these columns with
the name of our table the Alias we're
using I would like the first name from
table a the last name from table a
followed by I'm going to put this on a
new line just for readability
the first name
of table B
then the last name of table B
then be sure to include that within the
customer ID too so the customer ID of
table a
okay we're getting somewhere customer ID
first name last name first name last
name okay so if somebody were looking at
this table they would think why are
there two columns for both first name
and last name let's concatenate these
two columns
concat
first name last name I'll add a space in
between the first name and last name
I'm going to give this column an alias
as
referred by
all right there's our table
we have all of our customers who were
referred by another customer Larry
Lobster was referred by Fred fish bubble
bass and Poppy puff were both referred
by Larry Lobster
you could use a different type of join
besides an inner join we could use a
left join
what we're telling MySQL is to display
all of our customers on the left table
if one of these customers was referred
by another customer join those rows as
well you can see that with the left join
that Fred fish is still within our table
but he wasn't referred by anybody that
value is null so that's one example of a
self-join we're creating another copy of
the same table then joining it together
to the original but you'll need to give
each table an alias a unique nickname
here's another example of a self-join
let's select all from our employees
table
in our employees table Mr Krabs is a
manager Sandy Cheeks is an assistant
manager let's add an additional column
named supervisor ID to who does each of
these employees report to Squidward
SpongeBob and Patrick and Sheldon they
will all report to Sandy who's an
assistant manager
Sandy will report to Mr Krabs he's the
main manager and Mr Krabs doesn't report
to anybody let's add another column
alter table
employees
add
supervisor ID
the data type is int
and there's our new column
update employees
set
supervisor ID
equal to five that would be Sandy she's
the assistant manager
where
employee ID equals two that would be
Squidward
Squidward is now supervised by Sandy
three
that's for SpongeBob four is Patrick
six is Sheldon Plankton
now Sandy her supervisor idea is going
to be one she is supervised by Mr Krabs
set supervisor ID equal to one where
employee ID equals five
and here we are
using a self join we are going to
display the first and last names of all
of our employees along with the full
name of the person that's supervising
them because currently we only have
supervisor ID let's utilize a self-join
first let's select all
from our table employees
we'll need to give this table an alias
as a that's the original Let's do an
inner join inner join
employees as b b will be the copy
how are we going to link these
on the supervisor ID
of table a
equals the employee ID
of table B
all right we still have one massive
table but we can see here that Sandy
appears in multiple rows which is a good
start we don't necessarily need all of
this let's select the first name
and last name
of table a a DOT first name
a DOT last name
then I'm going to concatenate the first
and last name of table B so concat
B DOT first name
I'll add a space between the first name
and last name
B dot last name
I'm gonna give this column an alias
that's really ugly
as
reports two
that's much better all right we have our
hierarchy of data Squidward SpongeBob
Patrick and Sheldon Plankton they all
report to Sandy Sandy she reports to Mr
Krabs that Mr Krabs doesn't report to
anybody if you would like all of your
employees even if they don't report to
anybody you could instead use a left
join
because I left join we will display all
of the rows from our table on the left
so Eugene Krabs is here but he doesn't
report to anybody so yeah basically
speaking that's a self join you can use
any type of join but the tables you use
are the same one you use the original
table then a copy of that table but
you'll need to give them an alias to
distinguish them when we're selecting
the first and last names of our tables
are we referring to the original table
which I named as a or the copy because
that makes a difference with self-joints
they're great if you ever need to
display a hierarchy of data involving
the same table but yeah that is a
self-join in MySQL
hey everybody today I'm going to be
explaining views views their virtual
tables they're not real they're made up
of fields and columns from one or more
real tables and they can be interacted
with as if they were a real table so
here's an example I'm going to select
all from my employees table
our boss Mr Krabs he would like us to
create an employee attendance sheet made
up of just the first and last names of
all the employees well I could create a
view that is made from the first and
last name Columns of the employees table
now A View isn't a real table but it can
behave as if it were I may want to
create a view of the employee first and
last names instead of another table
because we try not to repeat data if we
don't have to if I had two tables one of
employees and another of employee
attendance if I need to remove an
employee I would need to do so in two
places with the view it's always up to
date any changes to one or more of these
real tables will also update the view so
let's create a view of the first and
last name of our employees table to
create a view you would type create view
then the name of the view let's say
employee attendance
then as I'm going to zoom in a little
bit
what would we like to select let's
select
first name
last name
from a real table let's say from
employees
so everything was successful
let's refresh our schemas window
underneath the views category we have a
new view employee attendance
I'm going to select all from that view
name employee
attendance
and let's see what we got yeah here's
our attendance sheet we have the first
and last name columns from the employees
table this view can be interacted with
as if it were a real table
I will add order by
last name ascending
you can use keywords and operators that
we've learned about in previous lessons
on A View to drop a view you would type
drop view the name of The View
employee
uh tendons
and it's gone
all right here's another example so
views they're always up to date right
let's create a view of customer emails
select all from customers
let's take a look to see what we have so
far
I'm going to add one more column a
column of customer emails
alter table
customers
add column email data type will be
varchar I think varchar 50 should be
enough space
and there's our new column
let's update these rows
update customers
set email equal to the first email will
be for Fred fish f
isch gmail.com then we'll need a where
Clause where customer ID equals one
that's our first email
customer ID 2 will be L Lobster
gmail.com
three is B bass gmail.com
four will be
puff gmail.com everybody really likes
Gmail I guess let's create a view from
these customer emails
create View
customer
emails
as what are we selecting let's select
the email column
from our customers table
let's refresh our schemas window yeah we
have a customer emails View
then I will select all from customer
emails
and look at that we have a listing of
all the customer emails and we're going
to spam these people with coupons or
something I don't know when you update
one or more of the real tables in your
database those views would reflect any
changes let's add one more customer so
let's take a look at our customers table
select all from customers
let's add one more customer
insert into our customers table
some values
we have five columns a customer ID
first name first name will be pearl
last name is crabs
referral ID let's say null
email will be P crabs gmail.com
okay there's our new customer let's take
a look at our view let's see if it
updated
select all from customer
emails
yeah look at that it's up to date that
is one of the benefits of a view it will
update automatically because we're using
components from real tables any views
that use that data will also be updated
the other benefit of a view is that we
don't have to repeat data in a real
table ideally we'd only want to make a
change in one place rather than across
multiple tables alright that's a view
everybody a view is a virtual table
based on the results of an SQL statement
they're not real tables but they can be
interacted with as if they were real the
fields found within a view are fields
from one or more real tables in the
database so yeah those are views in
MySQL
yeah it's me again and in today's video
I need to explain what indexes are in
MySQL and index is a type of data
structure they are used to find values
within a specific column more quickly
it's technically a b tree data structure
if you're familiar with what that is but
if you don't don't worry about it MySQL
normally performs searches sequentially
through a column if I'm looking for some
specific value just scan each value on
the way down to see if those values
match depending on what I'm looking for
it doesn't really take much time if you
have a small data set like I do but
imagine if you have millions of
transactions searching each transaction
one by one is going to take a long time
we can speed up that process by using an
index by applying an index to a column
selecting or searching takes less time
however updating takes a lot more time
so there are some pros and cons with
using an index it really depends on the
table if I'm working with a table of
transactions transaction actions are
being updated all the time people are
constantly making purchases I don't
think our transactions table would be a
good candidate for an index we'll be
doing a lot of updating but not a lot of
searching however with our customers
table I think our customers table could
benefit we don't update our customers
table very often only a new customer
comes in every once in a while let's
reduce the time it takes to search for a
customer with creating an index how
exactly do we want to find the customer
believe it or not we do have an index
with our customer ID already a customer
may give you their last name and or
first name let's create an index for
these we'll start with last name though
to show the current indexes of a table
you would type show indexes from the
name of the table
here are the current indexes for our
customers table we do have one already
and that's for our customer ID that is
the primary key we can search for a
customer by their customer ID fairly
quickly but not so much by their last
name or their first name let's apply an
index to those columns
to create an index you would type create
index
then a name I will apply an index to our
last name column I will name this index
last name idx meaning index
on the table customers in this case
then list a column I will apply an index
to our last name
we will be doing a lot of searching by a
customer's last name so I might as well
apply an index
so let's execute the statement let's
show our indexes again
show indexes from customers
and here is our new index last name
index it's applied to our column last
name if I were to search for a customer
by last name that process will be sped
up now
select all from
customers where
last name is equal to puff
so my data set is already very small to
begin with there's not going to be a
noticeable difference in this example
but if I'm working with a million
customers using an index would be a lot
faster if I were to search by first name
instead where first name equals Poppy
uh I spelled copy wrong well we don't
have an index applied to our first name
as of now it would be slower to search
for a customer by their first name
compared to their last name that first
name doesn't have an index realistically
we wouldn't search for a customer just
by their first name we would do a last
name or a last name and a first name
that's where multi-column indexes come
in
to create a multi-column index you would
type create
index a unique name let's say last name
first name
idx
on our table customers
then list the columns in order the order
is very important MySQL has what's known
as a leftmost prefix with indexes so we
will search by last name
then first name
let's execute the statement show our
indexes show indexes from
customers
here's our last name first name index
there's a sequence we're telling MySQL
to search by a last name however if
there's also a first name include that
too there needs to be a last name to
utilize this index if I want to I can
get rid of this last name index because
our last name first name index would do
the same thing we can search for a last
name as well as a first name if we would
like to drop an index you would type
alter table the name of the table
drop index the name of the index
last name index
then I'm going to go ahead and show
indexes from customers
and the last name index is gone
now if I was to search for a customer
select all from customers
where if I were to search for a last
name
we would benefit by using this
multi-column index if I looked for a
last name
and a first name
we would also benefit there's a sequence
we would search through any last names
first because that's first in the
sequence but if I was to search for just
a first name we would not utilize this
index
well everybody that's an index it's a
type of data structure that is used to
find values more quickly within a
specific column MySQL normally searches
through a column sequentially the longer
the column the more expensive the
operation is going to be if you were to
apply an index to a column searching and
selecting a value takes less time but
updating that table takes longer use it
if you think a table is a good candidate
where you don't update it very often and
well yeah those are indexes in MySQL
well hello again everybody today I need
to explain subqueries they can be pretty
complicated but I'll try my best to
explain it simply a sub query is just a
query within another query you write a
query and close it within a set of
parentheses whatever value or values are
returned from the subquery you would use
within an outer query I'll give you a
few demonstrations
I have an employees table our manager Mr
Krabs he needs us to compare every
employee's hourly pay with the average
hourly pay of our employees table maybe
Mr Krabs is going to give people a pay
reduction not an increase a pay
reduction but he needs to compare the
hourly pay of every employee versus the
average how can we write something like
that a task like that I would say
involves at least two steps we need to
find the average hourly pay first and
then display every employee's first name
last name hourly pay then the average
pay let's begin with the average pay
select
average function
hourly
pay
from my employees table
so far so good
15.45 is the average hourly pay of an
employee how do I use this number
whatever value or values are returned
from a sub query we can use within a
larger outer query let's delete this
semicolon I will surround this statement
with a set of parentheses I will then
write the outer query let's select the
first name
last name
the hourly pay
then comma our subquery
from
employees
there we are although I'm going to give
the subquery an alias as average pay and
I think I'm going to move this to the
next line
that is much better so we have
accomplished our task we have compared
every employee's hourly pay versus the
average once we complete the subquery
whatever value or values are returned
from the sub query we would use within
the larger picture the outer query just
imagine that we replaced the subquery
with 15.45 this value is what was
returned although you don't want to
write a concrete number like this just
because the average pay is bound to
change writing a sub query like this
would calculate our average pay
regardless if we add or remove employees
let's try a different example let's find
every employee that has an hourly pay
greater than the average pay so again we
can begin with the sub query
we need the average pay
select average function
hourly pay
from employees
so again we return 15.45
I'll use this within a where Clause
let's select
the first name
last name
hourly pay
from our employees table
where the hourly pay is greater than our
sub query
Mr Krabs and Sandy Cheeks are both
making more than the average hourly pay
what was returned was
15.45 then it's just a matter of
completing the outer query select the
first name last name hourly pay from
employees
where hourly pay is greater than 15.45.
it looks complicated but when you break
it down into steps it's a lot easier to
visualize we're going to cover a
completely different example we will be
working with customers and transactions
I'm going to select all from my
transactions table
we have a few transactions I would like
to find the first name and last name of
every customer that has ever placed an
order
we can do this step by step let's select
every customer ID from transactions
that's not null
select
customer ID
from
transactions
where
customer ID
is not no let's take a look
so we do have a few repeats we have one
two three and three you can add this
distinct keyword if there's any repeats
that would eliminate them
we have three registered customers that
have placed orders in the past customer
ID is one two and three but we don't
know who these customers are we will use
these values within a larger outer query
I will surround this query within a set
of parentheses
eventually we'll use this within a where
clause
let's select the first name
and last name
from our customers table
where customer
ID I will then use the in operator
then add my sub query
there we are there's our three customers
that have placed orders in the past Fred
fish Larry Lobster bubble bass this sub
query return to the values one two and
three imagine that once this query
resolves we are left with the values one
two three
so this outer query makes a lot more
sense select the first name and last
name from customers
where the customer ID is one of these
values one two or three you could do the
inverse two find the first name and last
name of every customer where the
customer ID is not in the sub query
this query would return every customer
that has never placed an order let's
send them a coupon in the mail to
convince them to place an order we were
left with values one two three
select the first name and last name from
any customers where the customer ID is
not in one of these values one two or
three Pearl Krabs had an idea five poppy
pups was four
so yeah that's a sub query everybody
it's just a query within a larger query
it helps to visualize this step by step
imagine that we're completing the
subquery first whatever value or values
are returned we can use within a larger
query and well yeah those are subqueries
in MySQL
hello everybody today I will be
explaining the group by Clause the group
I Clause will aggregate all rows by a
specific column it's often used with
aggregate functions such as the sum
function Max Min average count just to
name a few for my example I have a table
of transactions now if you've been
following along in my video series I did
add an additional column named order
date and filled in a few dates as well
as two additional rows if you would like
to follow along I would recommend
pausing the video adding a new column
for order date add these order dates
then add to additional rows that's all
the data that we'll need in this topic
now our boss Mr Krabs he needs us to
tell him how much money he made per day
what is the sum of all of the amounts
per day we have three different dates
January 1st January 2nd January 3rd what
is the sum of every amount on these days
so we can use the group I Clause that
would help us
we will select
the sum
of every amount
as a column we will also display the
order date from
transactions
then we will Group by we are grouping by
our order date
Group by order date column
yeah look at that there we are here is
the sum of every amount that is grouped
by these dates here's the total amount
we made January 1st the total amount
January 2nd the total amount January 3rd
let's try a different function how about
V Max function what was the maximum
amount on each day
these are the maximum transactions that
have occurred on these dates
what about men
these are the minimum amounts grouped by
order date
what's the average order every day
you're the averages
maybe count
how many transactions have taken place
each day we have two orders on the first
two orders on the second three orders on
the third let's try a different column
let's Group by customer ID this time how
much has each customer spent total we
will select
the sum of every amount
we will also need a column for customer
ID
from our table
transactions then we will Group by the
customer ID column this time
here is the sum of every amount that
each customer has ever spent we do have
some rows that don't have a customer ID
so we would sum those amounts as well so
far the customer with an ID of three
they have spent the most amount of money
at our establishment what about the max
here is the maximum order that each
customer has placed
the min
the average
then count
here is the amount of times that each
customer has ever visited our
establishment what if we would like to
use a where Clause well using a where
Clause along with the group I Clause
normally doesn't work for example I
would like to display all customers that
have visited more than once who are the
repeat customers
so if I attempt to use a where Clause
where
count
our amount column is greater than one
well we would run into an error if you
need to use a where clause and you're
using the group by Clause you would want
to instead use the word having that
would do the same thing Group by
customer ID where the customer ID has
made more than one purchase
we are also aggregating all of the
customer ideas that are null let's use
the and logical operator to remove that
and customer ID is not null
there we are the customer that has an ID
of three they have visited our
establishment two times they meet the
requirements of this having Clause they
have visited our establishment more than
once and their customer ID is not null
so if you ever need to use a where
Clause if you're already using the group
I Clause you would instead use having
so in conclusion the group by Clause
will aggregate all rows by a specific
column it's often used with aggregate
functions such as sum Max Min average
count
for example you could Group by an order
date what are the total sales per date
or by a customer ID how many times has
each customer visited our establishment
those are just a few examples and well
yeah that is the group by clause in
MySQL
hey again it's me today I'm going to be
explaining the roll-up Clause like a
fruit roll-up it's an extension of the
group by Clause it produces another row
and shows the grand total it's also
known as a super aggregate value here's
an example I have a table of
transactions what I would like to do is
to group each transaction by the order
date then produce a grand total here's
what we'll do I'll give you a few
different examples let's begin by
selecting the sum of the amounts
and the order date
from our table
transactions then we will Group by the
order date
and there we are we have the sum of
every amount per order date using this
roll-up Clause I can add an additional
row that shows a grand total so to say
all I have to do after the group by
Clause is ADD with roll up
and there you go here's the grand total
7.88 plus 8.37 plus 8.97 is
25.22 here's another example let's count
the transaction ideas
buy order date
we have two transactions on the first
two on the second three on the third
for a total of seven transactions
I'll give you two more examples
let's select the count of our
transaction ideas
per customer
I'm going to give this count an alias as
number of orders
as well as the customer ID column
from our table
transactions we will Group by customer
ID let's see what we have so far
then I will add with roll up
here are the amount of orders per
customer ID the customer with an ID of
three has visited here more than once
the grand total of the number of orders
is seven that's the roll up
one last example let's select our
employees table
select all from employees
we will group all of these employees by
their employee ID then display a roll-up
of all of the hourly pay as a business
how much are we spending on all of our
employees per hour
so let's select the sum of our hourly
pay
I'll give this an alias as
hourly pay I guess it really isn't
different from the column name
we will display the employee ID as a
column
from our table employees
Group by
the employee ID with rollup
here's the hourly pay of each employee
as well as a grand total if all of our
employees are working currently we are
spending as a business
92.75 cents per hour
well yeah that's the roll-up Clause
everybody it's an extension of the group
by Clause it produces another row and
shows essentially the grand total it's
also known as a super aggregate value to
include a roll-up after the group by
Clause just add with roll up it's
probably good for accounting and well
yeah that's the roll-up clause in MySQL
why hello there everybody today I will
be explaining the on delete Clause
there's two versions on delete Sentinel
and on delete Cascade with on delete set
null when a foreign key is deleted we
can replace the foreign key with the
value no otherwise there's and delete
Cascade
when a foreign key is deleted delete the
entire row here's an example let's take
a look at our table transactions select
all from
transactions
in my transactions table the customer ID
column is the foreign key what would
happen if I were to delete one of these
customers let's select all from our
customers table
I'm going to delete poppy puff she has a
customer ID of four
delete from customers
where customer ID equals four
if you run into this error cannot delete
or update a parent row a foreign key
constraint fails there's a foreign key
that's preventing us from deleting this
customer because this customer is used
elsewhere in a different table like that
transaction stable so just temporarily
for this demonstration
I'm going to set foreign key checks to
be zero
and that should work our customer with
an idea 4 is gone one two three five
poppy puff is no longer within our
customers table before I forget I'm
going to set foreign key checks back to
one
let's take a look at our transactions
table
underneath this transaction of 1005
we're referencing a customer that
doesn't exist the customer with an idea
4 is no longer within our customers
table we have a couple options whenever
we delete a primary key from another
table that's being used as a foreign key
as somewhere else
we can either replace that value with
null or delete the entire row with
Cascade with on delete set null we can
replace this value with null much like
these two rows
or on delete Cascade we can delete the
entire row let's begin with on delete
Sentinel I'm going to reinsert Poppy
puff back into our table of customers
and there we are poppy puff is back in
the customers table
now with on delete Sentinel if we're
creating a new table
let's say I'm recreating my table of
transactions after adding the foreign
key constraint foreign key our customer
ID column references the customer ID
column of the customers table I can add
this clause on delete set no
that's if I'm creating a new table but I
already do have a transactions table I
don't want to update it
however we can update an existing table
with this Clause I already do have a
foreign key constraint I'm just going to
drop it real quick
alter table
transactions
drop
foreign
key then the name of the foreign key
mine is FK underscore customer ID
and that key is now dropped we are going
to add a foreign key constraint to our
transactions table with this clause on
delete Sentinel alter table the name of
the table
add constraint you can give your
constraint a name I'll give it the same
name as before
FK customer ID
list the foreign key
foreign key
my foreign key is customer ID
references
another table which was customers and
what is the primary key of that table
customer ID
then we will add the clause on delete
set no
if I delete a customer ID from customers
the foreign key of that row will be set
to null automatically let's execute this
let's take a look at our transactions
table select all from transactions I am
now going to delete customer number four
from the customers table
delete from customers
where customer ID equals four
yeah check that out with our transaction
ID of 1005 the customer ID is now null
now there's and delete Cascade when a
foreign key is deleted we can instead
delete the entire row let's go ahead and
add poppy puff back to our customers
table
all right she's back in
let's drop the current foreign key
constraint of our transactions table
alter table transactions
drop
foreign key
FK
customer
ID or whatever else it's named
and that key is now gone we will add the
on delete Cascade Clause to a table that
already exists
alter table
transactions
add
constraint you can come up with the name
FK
underscore
transactions underscore ID list the
foreign key
customer ID
references
the customers table
and the primary key of that table is the
customer ID
then add on delete
Cascade
let's take a look at our transactions
table
select all from
transactions
oh let's update this customer ID real
quick I forgot to do that
update
transactions set customer ID equal to
four
where
transaction
ID equals 1005.
yeah I forgot to add that back now let's
do it
delete from
customers
where
customer
ID equals four
yeah take a look at that the entire row
is now gone
we have transactions one thousand three
one thousand four one thousand six one
thousand five is missing because it was
referencing the customer with an ID of
four we set the foreign key to delete
the entire row when that foreign key is
deleted that is on delete Cascade well
in conclusion everybody on delete is a
clause where if you delete a foreign key
you can set that value to be null or
Cascade which will delete the entire row
which has its uses and well yeah that's
the on delete clause in MySQL
why hello again it's me so today I gotta
explain stored procedures a stored
procedure is prepared SQL code that you
can save it's great if there's a query
that you write often for example I have
this statement it's very verbose there's
a lot we have to write if this statement
is something I have to write often I
could save it and reuse it later this
statement will interjoin the
transactions table and my customers
table then display all customers that
made a transaction this statement is
very verbose if I have to write the
statement often I could save it as a
stored procedure I can refer to the
nickname that I gave that snippet of
code the name I gave this procedure was
get customers
then I need to call this stored
procedure
and that does the same thing and it's a
lot less to write there's also a few
other benefits which we'll discuss at
the end of the video let's begin with
something simple I would like to select
all from my customers table to turn the
statement or statements into a stored
procedure I will type create
procedure
then a name for the statement or
statements I will name this statement
get customers
add a set of parentheses
type the keyword begin
wherever your statement or statements
end type end then for clarity I'm going
to tab all of my statements between
begin and end
so we have a problem we're trying to
create this procedure however MySQL is
stopping at this semicolon here we end
all statements with a semicolon rather
than at the end our semicolon is known
as a delimiter it's kind of like the
period at the end of a sentence we're
telling MySQL that our statement ends
here but we need our statement to end
here after the end keyword we can
actually change the delimiter
temporarily type delimiter before we
create the procedure
typically when people change their
delimiter temporarily they'll either use
two forward slashes or two dollar signs
I'll stick with the dollar signs because
I think that's cooler after we create
our procedure let's change our delimiter
back to the semicolon MySQL no longer
recognizes our semicolon as the
delimiter after the end keyword I will
use our new delimiter to end this
statement that should work now let's
execute the statement
we have created our procedure I'm going
to refresh my navigator window
underneath stored procedures we have our
stored procedure of get customers
to invoke the stored procedure type call
the name of the procedure get customers
add a set of parentheses then a
semicolon
that will execute whatever code you
stored within your stored procedure to
drop a stored procedure you would type
drop
procedure
the name of the procedure
get
customers
let's try another example
this time we will send our procedure a
piece of data within the set of
parentheses a customer ID number such as
1 2 3 4 so on and so forth
we will get a customer by their customer
ID we will create a procedure
I will name this procedure find
customer
add a set of parentheses to find a
customer by their customer ID when we
invoke the stored procedure within the
set of parentheses we will need to place
a customer ID but when we create the
stored procedure we have to set up what
is called a parameter we will type in
then a nickname for that piece of data
we're passing in a transaction ID I'll
give this parameter a nickname of ID
then we need the data type of what we're
passing in we're passing in an integer
so we have one parameter set up let's
use that begin keyword that end keyword
list our statement or statements between
these two keywords I will select all
from my customers table
where my customer ID equals the ID that
we pass in that nickname
we need to change the delimiter because
MySQL thinks we're trying to end our
statement here but we need it to end
after the end keyword so let's change
the delimiter to double dollar signs
then change it back
[Music]
all right we have created that stored
procedure let's invoke it
call
find customer
within the set of parentheses we need to
pass in a customer ID number
let's pass in one
that would give us Fred fish
two is Larry Lobster
three is bubble Bass
five is Pearl crabs when you invoke a
stored procedure you can pass in some
data depending on what you need exactly
for your stored procedure let's drop
this procedure then do one last example
drop procedure find
customer
[Music]
this time we will send two arguments two
pieces of data a first name and a last
name
create
procedure
find customer
within our set of parentheses the first
piece of data we'll pass in will be a
first name
but first is already a keyword maybe F
name meaning first name then the data
type let's see for customers the data
type of first and last names is
varchar50
varchar
50.
for your next piece of data you would
separate that with a comma
in
our nickname will be lname for last name
data type is varchar
50.
then I'm just going to put that on a new
line for clarity
type the begin keyword
and
write your statements between begin and
end
we will select all from our customers
table
where
first name equals
the name of the data that we pass in
and
last name equals
the other piece of data the second piece
the last name
again we need to change the delimiter to
create this procedure
double dollar signs
then change it back
we have created our stored procedure
let's invoke it
call find customer
within the set of parentheses we will
list a first name and a last name
Larry
comma
Lobster
get Larry Lobster's information let's
find him
and there he is customer id2 first name
Larry last name Lobster referral ID of
one email is L Lobster gmail.com all
right everybody that is a sword
procedure it's prepared SQL code that
you can save it's great if there's a
query that you write often a few of the
benefits is that it reduces Network
traffic it increases performance and is
more secure and administrator can grant
permission to a user or an application
to use a stored procedure one of the
downsides though is that it increases
memory usage of every connection and
well everybody those are stored
procedures in MySQL
hey everybody today I need to explain
triggers when an event happens a trigger
does something I know that sounds very
generic for example when we insert
update or delete a record we can use a
trigger to check data handle errors or
audit tables we could do a plethora of
things here's an example I have a table
of employees we have an hourly pay
column maybe I would like a salary
column whenever we add an employee or
update our hourly pay the employee's
salary will be changed automatically
with the trigger before creating a
trigger let's update our employees table
We'll add a salary column
alter table
employees
add column
salary the data type will be decimal
10 digits Precision of two
we will place this column after the
hourly pay column
then select all from our employees table
let's see what we have there we are
there's our salary column
let's update our employees table
set our salary column equal to the
hourly pay times to calculate an
employee's salary using an hourly pay
Sheldon Plankton for example take the
hourly pay ten dollars per hour there's
typically 40 hours in a work week then
52 weeks in a year
Plankton would have a salary of twenty
thousand eight hundred dollars so a
shortcut you could just take the hourly
pay times
2080. there are 2080 work hours in a
typical year so take the hourly pay
times 2080.
then we will select all from
employees
there is everybody's salary currently
whenever we update an employee's hourly
pay I would like to also update the
salary automatically with the trigger I
don't want to have to calculate every
employee's salary manually you know
using a calculator like I just did we're
going to create a trigger
create trigger
then we need a name for this trigger
before we update the hourly pay we're
going to do something I will name this
trigger before
hourly pay
update
we'll use either the keyword before or
after
do you want to do something before or
after I would like to do something
before
before what before an insert before
delete before an update before an update
in this case
on our table
employees
then add this line for each row
we may be working with more than one row
using a trigger so that's why we're
including this line This trigger can
involve one or more rows now what are we
going to do before we update an
employee's hourly pay let's set the
salary
equal to
the hourly
pay times 2080 because there's 2080 work
hours in a typical year
okay there's one more thing I'm going to
add let's prefix salary and hourly pay
with this new keyword new DOT salary new
DOT hourly pay MySQL doesn't know if
we're referring to the old salary and
the old hourly pay we're telling MySQL
we're calculating a new salary use the
new hourly pay when that's changed in
place of the old one okay let's take a
look let's execute this statement
our trigger has been created in your
schemas window to find any triggers go
to tables then find that table where we
applied the trigger employees
then triggers I probably need to refresh
this there it is before hourly pay
update otherwise you can type show
triggers
and here's our trigger
here's the trigger name event update the
table the statement and the timing
let's select all from
employees
Mr Krabs is going to give himself an
hourly pay raise because he's greedy
let's update our employees table
set the hourly
pay
equal to fifty dollars per hour
where our employee ID equals one
so Mr crab's salary is about fifty three
thousand dollars per year
before we update it we will change the
salary of this employee
from fifty three thousand dollars to
over six figures
104 000 that change happened
automatically with the trigger before
updating the employee's hourly pay we
calculated a new salary automatically
let's make another change let's increase
every employee's hourly pay by one
dollar per hour Mr Krabs is now feeling
generous
update employees we will set the hourly
pay equal to whatever the hourly pay
currently is
plus one
we will apply this for every employee we
don't need a where clause
there everybody is now making one more
dollar per hour and the salaries reflect
that let's create a new trigger we will
calculate a salary whenever we insert a
new employee more specifically whenever
we insert a new hourly pay right now we
have a trigger that only kicks in when
we update an hourly pay
okay let's delete plankton
Plankton got fired
delete from employees
where employee ID equals six
select all from employees
their Plankton is now gone
let's create a trigger
create trigger
before
hourly pay
insert
are we doing something after or before
we're doing something before an event
before are we updating inserting or
deleting we are inserting before we
insert a new record
on our table employees
for each row
let's set the new
salary
equal to
the new
hourly pay
times 2080.
here is our new trigger
let's take a look at our employees table
select all from employees
let's insert a new employee
insert into
employees
values
I'm just going to follow these columns
employee ID 6.
first name is Sheldon
last name plankton
hourly pay is ten dollars per hour
for the salary I'm going to set this to
null our trigger will kick in and set
that
position
janitor
higher date
2023 January 7th
supervisor idea five
let's see if our salary is calculated
it was
Plankton's hourly pay is ten dollars per
hour meaning he has a salary of twenty
thousand eight hundred dollars per year
I do have a few more examples triggers
are something you'll want to master
they're really helpful we're going to
create a new table this time
create table
expenses
our expenses table will have three
columns
an expense
ID the data type will be int this will
be the primary key you could set this
column to Auto increment if you want but
but that's overkill for this topic I
would say I'm going to try and keep it
simple
expense name
the data type is varchar
50 is good I suppose
then expense
total
I will set that to be decimal
10 digits Precision of 2 is fine then
let's select everything from our table
expenses
let's insert some values
insert into expenses
we have three rows one two three
ID of one
the expense name is salaries
for the value for now I'm going to set
that to be zero the second row will be
two
supplies zero
ID of three
maybe taxes
and zero
I will calculate the expense total of my
salaries bro
update expenses
I will set
the expense
total equal to I'll use a nested query
select the sum of salary
from
employees
where our expense name column right here
is equal to
salaries
this is all of these salaries combined
from the employees table the total is
two hundred fifty four thousand two
hundred eighty dollars whenever we
delete an employee we will update this
value found within another table our
expenses table
so let's create a trigger
create
trigger
after salary delete
are we doing something before
or after we're doing something after
deleting a salary
after delete
on
employees
for each row
we will update our expenses table
and set the expense
total
equal to
whatever the expense total currently is
minus that employee's salary
if we're deleting a salary we will refer
to that salary as the old salary
the net aware Clause where
expense
name equals
salaries
okay we have created our trigger
let's take a look at our expenses table
I'm going to delete Plankton again he's
fired
delete from employees
where employee ID equals six that's
plankton
then select all from expenses
look at that our expense total changed
it's now two hundred thirty three
thousand dollars
let's create a trigger that will update
our salaries whenever we insert a new
employee
create trigger
after salary insert
we're doing something after this time
after an insert
on our table employees
for each row
we will update
our expenses table
we will set the expense
total
equal to
the expense total
plus the employee's new salary
new DOT salary
where
expense
name equals
salaries
let's insert a new employee
let's take a look at our expenses table
select all from expenses
we will insert a new employee
insert into
employees
our values
employee ID 6.
first name is Sheldon
last name plankton
hourly pay of ten dollars per hour
the salary will be null that will be
calculated automatically with the
trigger
position is
janitor
higher date 2023-01-07
and a supervisor idea5
let's see if this expense total will
change
which it does when we insert a new
employee we're specifically a salary our
expense total of salaries will be
updated one last example that I promised
we're done let's create a trigger that
will update this value when we change an
employee salary and that will probably
be the most complicated one
let's create
a trigger
after
salary
update
we're doing something after
we update on our table employees
for each row
let's update
expenses
set the expense
total
equal to
the expense total Plus
the employee's new salary
minus the employee's old salary what's
the difference we'll find the difference
between the employee's new salary and
their old salary add that to the expense
total
where
expense
name equals
salaries
we have created our trigger
let's select all from expenses
Mr Krabs is going to give himself
another pay raise
update employees
set the hourly pay
of Mr Krabs to 100 per hour
where employee ID equals one
our expense total underneath salaries is
now changed it's now 356 thousand two
hundred dollars
well all right everybody that's a
trigger in simple words when an event
happens do something such as when we
insert update or delete something from a
table a few of the benefits is that you
can check data handle errors and audit
tables it's a really helpful tool to
have and well everybody those are
triggers in MySQL